[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Barbara Marx Hubbard.
Welcome to "The Powers
of Ancient Gods."
So what's really happening
as we humans have powers
that we used to attribute
to Zeus or Athena
or the Greek mythology gods?
Suddenly, we've got these powers
of our so-called ancient gods,
and we're being given, by
the process of evolution
or by spirit, or
however you want
to see it-- by the great
creating process itself,
we are being given
powers that are godlike.
We can destroy this Earth.
We can evolve this planet.
We can extend our life.
We can go into space.
We can seek other life.
These are powers
of ancient gods.
And I've said our crisis
is a birth, and most of us
don't like it.
[LAUGHS]
And if you ever saw a baby
who's just being born,
they don't like it either.
It's painful.
And it's difficult. And
it's not until that baby
is held in its mother's arms and
is able to breathe and realize
it's going to survive
that it actually begins
to open its collective eyes.
And what I think we're doing now
is just barely opening our eyes
to what could be considered
the miracle and glory of being
given powers that we used
to attribute to gods,
and that somehow the great
creating process has given
our generation of humans
the powers either to destroy
our planetary life support
system or the powers to heal
and to evolve and to become
"godlike," in old terms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we happen to live at
the exact moment in history
when the mythology
of our ancient gods
is actually being given to us
in this generation of humans.
And we don't yet have
the story clearly
in our own consciousness
to understand
the meaning of our power.
So one reason why I want us to
understand the story is if you
look back-- and I keep say
overview, perspective--
you will see that the story
from the origin of creation
to the formation
of Earth and life--
animal life, human
life, and now us--
is a trajectory that's not
just an occasional moment
in history, it's the
purpose of the story itself,
is to give individual humans the
ability to see the long story,
to gain the powers, and to begin
to enter evolution consciously.
So from the perspective
of the trajectory
and the world view of
conscious evolution,
we are the first generation in
the history of this Earth given
the powers of our ancient gods.
And the whole purpose is
let's use them with love.
When we discover our
new story of evolution,
which only was
recently discovered,
when they discovered
the background radiation
in the 1960s, when
they discovered
the Big Bang, when
that the universe is evolving.
As we said, Einstein thought
it was an eternal universe.
This is new.
It's not in our churches.
It's not in our schools.
It's not in our universities.
The story is not usually told.
But when we hear
it, and when we know
that we're part of
the story, then we
begin to understand
that the ideas we hold
will affect reality, and these
ideas are called "memes."
Memes are ideas that, if enough
of us hold them simultaneously,
they create the reality of
what those memes are saying.
For example, we've
had a terrible set
of memes in the 20th
into the 21st century.
We had Nazism.
That was a meme--
a set of ideas
about Jewish people.
And as long as the German
people held that meme,
they could burn Jews alive.
Now, it would be
almost impossible
for the German people
to be able to do that,
because the meme is gone.
The meme of communism was
a hugely powerful meme
that killed millions of
people on behalf of communism
as a meme.
Now, even though there
still is communism,
nobody believes that
that behavior pattern
was the best they could do.
I mean, it's no
longer acceptable.
And the same is true of a
mutually assured destruction
as a security plan.
My brother-in-law
Daniel Ellsberg,
who wrote a story of
the nuclear warriors,
he said, when you look over
much of our defense plan,
it ends up with the threat
of nuclear annihilation
to protect each other.
That's also mad.
Rwanda was a meme,
where they were
able to kill one another
because of the thing
of the tribal identity.
So what we're saying now is
we have a new set of memes.
And our memes can
create reality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have scattered memes
now, in our culture.
We are gaining powers
to heal the earth,
to free each other--
powers that we
used to attribute to our gods.
So how can we get an
understanding, let's say,
of the memetic pattern
of modern culture,
of modern civilization, that we
would feel that we can act on
collectively?
Not just occasionally
and individually.
So the best way
to do that is look
at the Wheel of Co-Creation.
Look at all the sectors, their
functions of any community--
from a small community
at a local level,
or a planetary society.
We all have health.
We have education.
We have governance.
We have science and technology.
We have personal growth.
The Wheel of
Co-Creation is a place
of gathering our new memes.
So when we put the memes
in health, in education,
in governance,
where we're showing
are moving towards a more
positive future in those memes,
and we connect them--
do you remember, like
Ilya Prigogine said,
if you do a nonlinear
connectivity
of individual actions that
work, or innovations that work,
you get a jump.
So the only way we will really
get a positive jump rather than
a negative jump is by connecting
what's already jumping--
by connecting what's
already working,
and looking for the synergistic
pattern of the culture
in which we're living.
And when any of
us see it, then we
start to enter into evolution
by choice, not chance,
because we see the
direction, the trajectory,
and then you put your
own ideas in there.
What do you think is the next
step for your positive good?
But you're putting
it in a context
of the movement towards
the next stage of evolution
and the powers of gods.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Peter Russell wrote
an interesting book
called "A White Hole in Time."
And in this book,
he has a hypothesis
that I like very much, and it
could actually be the truth.
It appears that it takes
approximately 10 billion atoms
to create a molecule,
and 10 billion molecules
to create a cell, and 10 billion
cells to create an organism.
Apparently, we have about almost
8 billion people on this Earth,
meaning we're close
to 10 billion people.
So the thought
that Peter has is,
as we approach 10 billion
humans on planet Earth,
will we start having
the experience of being
members of a new organism?
Will we get the feeling
of wholeness, of oneness,
and community?
Will we realize
that each one of us,
no matter how unique we are, is
actually a member of a living
planetary body?
And if that were to happen, we
would move into the new world
view naturally.
We're individuals
with each a choice
to what we want to do as part
of a living organism that
is so much greater than
the sum of our parts.
And we would be recognizing
that at that growing edge,
there's health, education, and
economics within this living
system that we're part of,
that is literally powers
we used to attribute to gods.
And so one reason why this story
is so important for everybody
to know is that it's
true, [CHUCKLES]
but it takes a perspective
to see it clearly.
And since it's not being taught
or told in our institutions,
it's up to us to
learn it and to be
the leaders at this stage of
our own conscious evolution.
The story makes the difference.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Thinking of planet Earth
as a living organism,
as a super organism,
let's just for a moment
look at our
communication systems
connecting us up on a
planetary scale that never
existed before this scale.
Let's take our defense
systems, whether it
be Russia or the United States
or so many other smaller
nations now with their nuclear
weapons and their weapons
systems.
It's integrated.
There's no such thing
as winning a war
with a nuclear weapon, because
the others have it right away.
So our defense
systems are linked.
You can't gain power
over the way we used to.
Our production
systems of the way
we produce goods and
services is now global.
And anything that you produce
in one part of the world,
you can receive in
another part of the world.
The economic systems are global.
So the world view is
helping us to realize
we're one living planetary
body, and each of us
is a member of that body.
And when we take our
evolutionary perspective,
we see the body itself
is gaining powers
that can take us to the
next stage of our species
as a universal humanity.
So the important
thing, particularly
for the young
people of the world,
is to realize that they are
born at the generation when
we either destroy ourselves
or evolve ourselves
in totally new directions.
What would have to happen
among ourselves for this story
to be making sense to people?
You can hear it, but what
would make it possible
for you to feel it?
I use the word empathy--
feeling with one another.
We know when there's
a crisis and we
see somebody had an accident,
we feel immediate empathy.
But the empathy doesn't last.
We get empathy when we are
excited by like a lunar
landing, and we're all together
urging onward that first step
on the moon.
That's a form of global empathy.
In the past, however,
empathy does not last.
You go back to feeling isolated.
It's my intuition that due
to our mass communication
system, due to our production
system, due to our defense
systems all being interrelated
whether we like it or not,
there are more and more of
us feeling a global empathy.
And what are we
feeling empathy with?
Not only each
other individually,
but let's take that deep
inner impulse of evolution,
if we call it the
evolution of love,
from source through cells--
multicells-- animals,
humans-- into our hearts,
do you feel that the deepest
impulse inside yourself
is the evolution of your
love, of your creativity,
of your desire to be empathetic?
Is it possible that
the evolution of love
is evolving us now?
If it evolves cells and
multicells and animals,
it's not stopping here.
So here is what might be
considered an outrageously
optimistic statement [CHUCKLES],,
given behavior of humans
on the Earth--
is that empathy is increasing.
And the evolution of love,
the impulse of evolution
itself, is growing in
millions of us subtly.
More love, more
freedom, more desire
to be empathetic
with each other.
And I believe one more degree
of that in enough of us
will turn the planetary system
on as though it's alive,
and we will do what
Buckminster Fuller says.
We will utilize our
resources, our technology,
and our know-how to make of this
world a success for everybody
without taking it
away from anybody.
The awesome good
news of this story
is almost too much for
most of us to believe.
But if you check
it out, you will
see that everything that I'm
saying is actually happening.
So what would stop
it from happening
is the illusion of
being separate--
of acting on that illusion,
because it's not so.
(LAUGHING) We're not--
we are individualistic,
but we're not separate from
a living organism which
is part of a larger universe.
So this story holds
within it the seed
of the future that
will give, really,
the potential of human
evolution such as no species
has ever had before.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A well-known futurist, Ray
Kurzweil, has coined a phrase,
"The singularity is near."
And what he means by that
is that if you accumulate
and utilize the full
scale of human capacities,
we're crossing over in
intelligence and capacities
to where we have never
been before as a species.
And the qualities that are
included in this singularity
is our ability with
genetics, which
is we can change the gene code
of our own body as we choose.
That's never existed before.
Another quality is robotics.
We can create
intelligent machines
that can do anything
that is robotic.
And in some
respects, that's good
because humans should not
have to be doing robotics.
That means each of
us is going to have
to do more and more of what
we're uniquely creative at.
Now, we need to have an economy
that makes that possible.
But that's good
news, ultimately,
that the robotic behavior
is no longer necessary.
There's genetics,
there's robotics,
and then there's nanotechnology.
Now, what is nanotechnology?
It's the ability to
build, atom by atom,
like nature does, to build
new organisms consciously.
And Eric Drexler
was the young man
who was one of the
inventors of nanotechnology.
And many years ago one
day, he called me up
and he said, Barbara, I
think we can do resurrections
from the dead.
Which of course is a miracle
in the New Testament.
And I said to him, well,
it's about time Eric.
[LAUGHS] He said, what do
you mean it's about time?
I said, well, in our
spiritual tradition,
it is said that it was done.
Is it true, possibly, that
our spiritual insights
are what our technological
capacities are about--
able to happen.
Now, nanotechnology is now
happening all over the world.
So genetics, robotics,
nanotechnology
is leading to a singularity of
the increase of intelligence
in many, many forums that makes
us radically new as a species.
Because when you get
that our crisis is
the birth of a species
capable of coevolution
with nature, spirit, and God--
when you get that, you might
have a planetary smile.
And if this meme takes
hold in our consciousness,
then we'll move
in this direction,
because memes create reality.
If the memes that take hold
of us that we're failing
and we're ultimately not
capable of positive action
with our new power,
we won't do this.
So what nature, gods has done is
given us this moment of choice.
And the new story is essential
to the planetary choice
for a positive future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Empathy is a field
of consciousness out
of which this story can come.
But then we can
extend our empathy
into feeling with beings
or experiences that are not
of this Earth, that have
not been verified totally
by modern science.
For example, UFOs.
Many people have had the
experience of contact.
Like Nassim Haramein, who is
a very brilliant scientist,
is telling me his
world view that we've
been visited by many,
many generations of UFOs
that have given us certain
of our capacities of gods.
Now is that true,
or is that not true?
It's not verifiable.
So the question is, have you
had an experience of dimensions
beyond the rational mind
that may or may not be true,
like UFOs, like altered
states of consciousness,
like new beings that have
never been seen before?
I am certain that there
is more in the universe
than we have
already experienced.
There's more in the universe
than science or our defense
department has been
able to affirm.
And so let's stay open
and share with each other.
And the criteria
really is not do
you have them
uniquely and only you,
but do enough others
have these experiences?
And if so, let's include
it in the possibility
of the new species,
which itself is new,
and we don't know fully
what we're going to become.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Many of our scientists,
like Ervin László and Nassim
Haramein and Bruce Lipton
and Gregg Braden are speaking
of the reality of us coming
from the quantum vacuum.
And the quantum vacuum, at
zero-point energy, it is said,
has approximately
infinite energy.
So what is coming out
into our activities
comes from zero-point energy.
And when we tap directly
into zero-point energy--
and there are those
who say we can do it
and we can make vehicles and
machines that come direct
from zero point energy--
we entirely would shift the
economic system of the world.
We're still based on
scarcity, our economic system.
What if that's not so?
What if the new species
is going to tap in there
and give us the power of
nanotechnology, biotechnology,
quantum computing, artificial
intelligence, empathy,
creativity, contact
with entities or life
beyond this planet?
The vision of
what's now possible
is actually greater than the
human imagination can fully
understand.
Now what I think is
important that it
would be just
difficult to understand
that we came from no thing at
all for billions of years--
from single cell to multicell
to animal to human to us--
that's awesome.
There's no reason, therefore,
to assume that we're not
going to take the
next step that is
in the direction of evolution,
rather than extinction,
based on our choice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think of myself and yourself
and every single one of us
as evolution.
I am evolution.
You are evolution.
Every atom, molecule,
and cell of your being
has been and is now being
created by evolution.
None of them, however,
until this human species
has come along, have been
conscious as evolution.
When I recognize and remember
that I am evolution being
conscious of itself and I draw
on the genius of the billions
of years of evolution, coded,
actually, in my own body--
in the atoms, molecules, cells,
organs, and brain of myself,
then I get a completely
different internal experience
of reality.
And as a woman of 88, I
am evolution evolving.
So I am not only alive this
moment, but I'm emerging.
And if somebody
says Barbara, do you
feel younger or older, I say
no, I feel newer, as I've said.
Why newer?
Because I am.
You are.
We are emergent, but in the
direction of choice now.
Not just pure evolutionary
direction with so many mass
extinctions.
Therefore, our
choice, our awareness,
our willingness to say
yes to our creativity
is giving us the
chance as a species
to become conscious
evolutionaries
and evolve ourselves, our
planet, and life beyond us.
We feel it spiritually.
We feel it as the impulse of
creativity and divine purpose,
however you would like to
call it, inside yourself.
So we feel conscious
evolution spiritually.
Then, we feel it socially.
And that's through
your vocation.
What are you called to do?
What are other people doing?
What is the vocare--
the impulse inside
you calling you to?
If you're fortunate, you
find the unique expression
of your capability
as your vocation.
You find what you are
uniquely called to do.
That becomes a life
purpose that turns
on your evolutionary potential
and that fills you with life,
fills you with the
pleasure, you might say,
of saying yes to the impulse
of your vocation, no matter how
challenging.
So spiritually, you feel
the impulse vocationally,
and then we are now
analyzing it scientifically
and technologically.
So this impulse, now, in
our generation of humans,
is indeed giving us powers
not only of ancient gods,
but of new humans who never
existed before on this planet
and who are giving us the
opportunity for a future
of untold possibilities.
We also have learned
from Bruce Lipton
that our genes are
blueprints, not our destiny,
and that our
consciousness creates
the quality of
expression of the DNA
at the center of every cell.
So that means if we have the
consciousness that our story is
the birth of a new species,
and that you and I are called
by our own innate capabilities
to participate in that,
what happens to your DNA?
You know what?
It says yes.
I feel even with aging--
that's a very important issue
for people as they get older--
is that your yes to your life
purpose affects your aging.
And the cells are
saying, OK, let's
keep her going for a while.
She thinks there's more to do.
So the DNA is capable
of actually being
receptive to your intention.
What this means is that not
only your stated intention,
but the thoughts
that you're holding,
the internal experience
you have of reality,
the internal thoughts that
you may not even fully express
to yourself, are
affecting your own DNA,
and they affect how you feel.
If you feel troubled,
if you feel concern,
if you feel
depressed, often, it's
because of this
unconscious thought
pattern that's guiding you.
And the thing to do is
notice that thought pattern.
See if you can bring
it up to consciousness.
What's going on in there that
you may not be even aware of?
And then choose the thought
that you would like to create.
That's an enormous power there.
So I'm choosing the thought
that our story is a birth,
and therefore that I, as
a member of this planet,
am being born, and I'm
88 and I have more to do,
so I'm thinking my
DNA is saying yes.
Yours will say yes too.
And so it's very important
to think choicefully.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The key to the evolution
of consciousness
is the evolution of love.
And love is the inner impulse of
creation toward more life, more
freedom, more awareness.
And you're saying
yes to the impulse
of that increases the
love in your heart,
increases your
empathy, increases
the intimacy of
your relationship,
increases contact
with one another.
And evolution is turning
on in you, as you,
and as far as we know,
there is no known limit
to that potentiality.
So when we combine this
empathy with our new capacities
and our internal yes to
being who we are becoming--
you have to say yes.
You have to want it.
You have to choose it.
God put freedom in the system.
You're not going to just sit
back and say change me, God.
You're going to say
yes to the impulse,
and when you do that
impulse turns on.
And when it turns on
and you connect up
with others turning
on and you're
looking at that entire health,
education, economic, science
and technology--
all the innovations reality
now has to offer you,
become a new being
in consciousness.
You become aware that you are
evolution consciously choosing
to evolve.
You tap into the source
of creation itself.
You gain a certain joy
of being that is not
about a particular
event, but it's
a joy of your awareness
of the nature of reality.
With all the pain and all
the amount of annihilation
that has gone on for
billions of years,
the directionality is in you.
And because we're entering the
age of conscious evolution,
this choice brings
evolution itself into focus
through humans and through you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When we realize that we
individually, as well
as collectively, have
powers of ancient gods
and that we are those
gods come alive right now,
then the experience
that we can have of life
is transformed from the
challenges and the difficulties
and the uncertainties
to a form of optimism,
a form of creativity,
and of thankfulness
to be alive at this
greatest moment of choice
of your entire human family.
And by your yes, you're
tipping the scales forever.
And if the inner god shows
up as you creating, loving,
and emerging, you will find
that we actually collectively
have far more than the
powers of ancient gods.
[MUSIC PLAYING]